---
title: dm Kernel
source: https://spring.io/blog/2009/10/19/dm-kernel
scraped: 2026-02-24T09:03:08.381Z
description: Level up your Java code and explore what Spring can do for you.
meta: Engineering | Steve Powell |  October 19, 2009 | 0 Comments
---

# dm Kernel

_Engineering | Steve Powell |  October 19, 2009 | 0 Comments_

In Milestone M5, for the first time, ***dm Kernel*** is available standalone. You can get it from [here](http://www.springsource.com/download/community?project=SpringSource%20dm%20Kernel).

## What is dm Kernel?

Basically, ***dm Kernel*** is everything good about *dm Server* except support for web applications. So, there are no web apps supplied (not even *Admin Console* or *Splash*) and no *Tomcat* —just the kernel.

Essentially, *dm Kernel* provides you with all that is good about dm Server’s OSGi support, including:

-   scoping
-   hot deployment
-   pars
-   bundles
-   plans
-   configuration properties
-   auto-provisioning
-   repositories
    -   all repository types: watched, external ***and*** remote
    -   chain support (the chain is empty by default)
-   easy configurability
-   the [user region](http://blog.springsource.com/2009/10/13/regions/)
-   full system and application tracing and dump support
-   oh, and of course, Spring beans and Spring DM support as usual,

but no web stuff.

If you want OSGi modular support for your system apps, but don’t want or need to host web applications, then dm Kernel is what you want.

This is *exactly the same* kernel that is shipped with a full dm Server—no modifications or adaptations. Being able to deploy and run the kernel by itself is yet another demonstration of the clean, modular design of dm Server.

## Small print

*How do I administer a dm Kernel without the Admin Console?* (I can almost hear you ask.) Well, the answer is also provided in M5—use the [Shell](http://blog.springsource.com/2009/10/15/the-dm-shell/) either locally or remotely (over ssh). You’d think we planned this, or something.

Enjoy.