---
title: SpringOne2GX 2015 replay: Spring Boot Micro-services, Containers, and Kubernetes - How To
source: https://spring.io/blog/2015/10/19/springone2gx-2015-replay-spring-boot-micro-services-containers-and-kubernetes-how-to
scraped: 2026-02-23T19:38:10.246Z
description: Level up your Java code and explore what Spring can do for you.
meta: News | Pieter Humphrey |  October 19, 2015 | 4 Comments
---

# SpringOne2GX 2015 replay: Spring Boot Micro-services, Containers, and Kubernetes - How To

_News | Pieter Humphrey |  October 19, 2015 | 4 Comments_

Recorded at SpringOne2GX 2015 Speaker: Ray Tsang, Google Slides: [https://speakerdeck.com/saturnism/2015-springone-2gx-java-based-microservices-and-kubernetes-how-to](https://speakerdeck.com/saturnism/2015-springone-2gx-java-based-microservices-and-kubernetes-how-to) Join this session to learn how to create a Java-based microservice using Spring Boot, containerize it using Maven plugins, and subsequently deploy a fleet of microservices and dependent components such as Redis using Kubernetes. Spring Boot makes creating microservices fast and easy - when it comes to running a single instance. Like most Java application, the harder part is usually the clustering and fail-over configurations. First, we'll go over how get started with Spring Boot, and, subsequently, using Maven plugins to generate and create Docker images during the build process. Next, we'll go over some basic architecture and configurations, such as: - Configuring Spring Session - Using Redis as the session store - Testing the configuration locally with container linking - Tips and tricks for faster startup (/dev/./urandom is your friend) Finally, with the images, we'll deploy the microservice into Kubernetes: - Defining pods and services - Linking microservices to Redis using Kubernetes - Perform rolling upgrades of the application - Canary new versions of the microservices into the fleet Best part - we can visualize all of these activities happening in Kubernetes.

Join this session to learn how to create a Java-based microservice using Spring Boot, containerize it using Maven plugins, and subsequently deploy a fleet of microservices and dependent components such as Redis using Kubernetes. Spring Boot makes creating microservices fast and easy - when it comes to running a single instance. Like most Java application, the harder part is usually the clustering and fail-over configurations. First, we'll go over how get started with Spring Boot, and, subsequently, using Maven plugins to generate and create Docker images during the build process. Next, we'll go over some basic architecture and configurations, such as: - Configuring Spring Session - Using Redis as the session store - Testing the configuration locally with container linking - Tips and tricks for faster startup (/dev/./urandom is your friend) Finally, with the images, we'll deploy the microservice into Kubernetes: - Defining pods and services - Linking microservices to Redis using Kubernetes - Perform rolling upgrades of the application - Canary new versions of the microservices into the fleet Best part - we can visualize all of these activities happening in Kubernetes.